Mystical Longings - Four's Search for the Beloved
Paula Raines
There are numerous paths on the mystical quest. Each of the Enneagram points uses energies unique to its fixation to either fuel the drive to Unitive Consciousness or to fodder personal suffering and malcontent. The classic depiction of Fours by most Enneagram teachers and writers is of introverted emotions driving emotional intensity and suffering. Certainly when Fours are functioning within the average to unhealthy levels of the Riso-Hudson continuum this description is accurate. At these levels, Fours are perceived as overly indulgent in emotions, too sensitive to perceived slights and criticism, and as melancholic outsiders who are self-involved with issues or attitudes about most other people. Fours at these psychological levels lose touch with day-to-day practical and physical needs as they become wrapped in their romanticized world of suffering and belief they are defective, different or special.

Yet many of the greatest mystics who have transcended culture and history are Fours. These mystics translate the energy of Four’s passion and longing into energies that drive a quest for connection with the Divine. The average to low functioning Four who is lost in feeling, craves deep connection with other people and despairs when s/he never achieves this desire. The healthy Four mystic uses the very “fact” of the disconnection as the “ground” from which to leap into an experience of the Divine.

How the longing and separation is manifested in any individual Four has to do with the intersection of three qualities: level of health in the Riso/Hudson continuum, instinctual drive and level of consciousness (the Wilber spectrum of consciousness, see Transpersonal Psychology, Levels of Consciousness and the Enneagram; EM Dec. 2001).

The emphasis of this article is to focus on the transpersonal realms within the spectrum of consciousness as they translate through the fixation of Four. Writing the article was difficult. My Three fixation wants a conclusion, a goal, an orderly progression of ideas leading somewhere. My Four wing took over and allowed the article to drop from one level of depth to another. There is no conclusion. My Four friends who have read the article in what I believed to be “unfinished” (read unconcluded) form tell me that any conclusion would distract from the article’s premise.

The article will discuss how the same emotional energies, which can be self-destructive in average to low functioning Fours, can be positively cathected in healthy exemplars. The flow of the writing moves from what Enneagram authors say about the Four fixation into the ever-deepening mystery of the mystical experience.

The sweet pain of longing can produce either suffering, or a light in the darkness leading the Four towards ever-higher states of consciousness and rapture. Classically, Fours have been called ‘The Artist” or “The Creator” but these terms only partially define the emotional energetics which provide the underpinning for this fixation. When the Artist or Creator is considered from an archetypical viewpoint, the terms best describe the self-preservation Four who works to manifest romantic longings into physical form. The dynamic that underpins the sexual and spiritual instinct drive in Four is deeper. It is a less understood and more rarefied archetype which is the ability to call the light suddenly into the darkness…the dawn after the dark night of the soul, or archetypically “a light in the dark.” Some of the greatest of the mystical poets, Rilke, Miribai, Rumi, Hafiz, Kabir, are clearly Fours driven by the “classic” Four’s longing and cry for connection. However, each of these mystics has transformed the desire into an ultimate longing for the Divine; a search which lights up their days and nights and leads them to ever more transcendent states of consciousness.

Fours such as Rumi have used the emotion of longing as the path, for fueling transpersonal transcendence in the quest for unitive consciousness. One of the most frequent statements I hear from high functioning Fours is the insistence that it is the quest, not the finding, which is important and were they to find that for which they search, they would need to create the next longing to take them ever deeper into the mystery.

The quest’s ultimate goal is the state of unitive consciousness—beyond all time, space or duality; beyond “I” and “Thou.” While all Fours, regardless of instinctual drive, can long for the mystical experience, it is most clearly manifested in the poetry and writings of those Fours who are motivated primarily by the sexual and spiritual instincts.

For Fours, I suggest the instinctual drives manifest archetypically as follows:

Self-Preservation – Artist

Social – Catalyst/Change Agent or Orphan

Sexual – Divine Lover

Spiritual – Seeker of the Beloved

Rumi, an 11th century Sufi mystical poet and driven primarily by a spiritual instinctual drive, explains how the Four’s energies of longing can be alchemized and transmuted from suffering to quest:

Love Dogs
One night a man was crying,
            Allah! Allah!
His lips grew sweet with the praising,
Until a cynic said,
            “So! I have heard you
calling out, but have you ever
gotten any response?”

The man had no answer to that.
He quit praying and fell into a confused sleep.

He dreamed he saw Khidr, the guide of souls,
In a thick, green foliage.
            “Why did you stop praising?”
“Because I’ve never heard anything back.”
            “This longing
you express is the return message.”

The grief you cry out from
Draws you toward union.

Your pure sadness
That wants help
Is the secret cup.

Listen to the moan of a dog for its master.
The whining is the connection.

There are love dogs
No one knows the name of.

Give your life
To be one of them.

                                                — Rumi

Many consider Rumi the greatest of the mystical poets and it is interesting that he did not begin creating poetry until after the disappearance of the “friend of his heart” Shams of Tabriz. (He didn’t write, but spoke the poetry as he twirled … he was the founder of the whirling dervishes … the lines were recorded by his students). Before the sudden and dramatic appearance of Shams, Rumi was a religious scholar and spiritual teacher but not a poet. The story is told that Shams disappeared once then returned years later. The second time he disappeared, he was gone for good (some say murdered by Rumi’s followers). After both losses poetry flowed out of Rumi, a least one new poem a day, resulting in his becoming one of the most prolific poets of all times.

Fours know innately that by the very act of embodiment we separate from the Unity of Universal Spirit and become individualized consciousness. Modern physics provides the analogy that we become particle rather than wave. In more ancient Vedic traditions, human consciousness is described as a cup of water drawn from the universal ocean. We are all broken vessels, disconnected or separated from the source, and fours are the type most keenly aware of the “human condition.” The sweet longing to reconnect, this mystical search for the Divine Force is what the Sufis call the Search for the Beloved. In the next poem, Rumi eloquently describes the keening pain of a reed cut from a riverbed in order to make the moaning and crying sound of a wind instrument:

Since I was cut from the reed bed
I have made
this crying sound. Anyone
separated from someone he loves
understands what I say:
            Anyone pulled
            from a source
            longs to go back.

                                                — Rumi

An example of how this longing manifests itself within a dominant sexual instinct can be found in the great Hindi bhakti poet Mirabai. Mirabai was a princess who married a prince.

After five years, he died in battle and Mirabai became dedicated to the god Krishna. Against the wishes of her in-laws, she spent all her time in the company of sadhus, holy men. Soon she became a devotee of Krishna and a sadhu rejecting her “noble” heritage to live the life of an ascetic, barefoot beggar. This so enraged the prince’s family they tried three times to kill her.

The stories recount that the first time they tried poison, the next a poisonous snake hidden in a basket and the final a bed of iron nails and spikes. Each time Mirabai defied death claiming she was saved by her love for and the intervention of her “husband-god” Krishna. It is said that her in-laws finally succeeded in hiring men to capture her. She begged her captors before they returned her to her in-laws that she be allowed to spend one night in a temple with a painting of Krishna.

It is reputed the next morning when her captors came to get her she was gone. All that was left was her hair and robe …and her poetry of the mystical union between herself and Krishna who she called her “Dark Lord.”

Dark One,
how can I sleep?
Since you left my bed
the seconds drag past like epochs;
each moment
a new torrent of pain.
I am no wife,
no lover comes through the darkness –
lamps, houses, no comfort.
On my couch
the embroidered flowers
pierce me like thistles,
            I toss through the night.

Yet who would believe my story?
That a lover
bit my hand like a snake,
and the venom bursts through
            and I’m dying?

I hear
the peacock’s faraway gospel,
the nightingale’s love song,
the cuckoo –
thickness on thickness folds through the sky,
clouds flash with rain.
Dark One, is there no love
in this world
that such anguish continues?
Mira waits for a single
            Glance from your eye.

                                        — Mirabai

At the end of another of her poems, Mirabai says: “The heat of midnight tears will bring you to God!”

This burning longing flamed by an acute awareness of divine disconnection and reciprocal desire for reconnection through love is the consistent theme of the sexual Four. The question is, How will the longing be used? Will it create pain and suffering or ecstasy?

            The heart is
The thousand-stringed instrument

That can only be tuned with
            Love.
                                        — Hafiz

Even at their “highest” psychological health in the Ego/Biographical levels of consciousness, Fours hold on to their suffering, using the sweetness of their pain as the catalyst for connection to something much greater than the self.

My Eyes So Soft

Don’
Surrender
Your loneliness so quickly.
Let it cut more
Deep.

Let it ferment and season you
As few human
Or even divine ingredients can.

Something missing in my heart tonight
Has made my eyes so soft,
My voice so tender.

My need of God
Absolutely
Clear.
                                         — Hafiz

However, when Fours do connect with, fall or melt into a sense of the divine, push themselves over the edge and into the unknown, they use suffering to transcend all pain, even the pain of life and death.

How Fascinating

How
Fascinating the idea of death
Can be.
Too bad, though
Because it just isn’t
True
                                         — Hafiz

The Hopi talk about how every day one takes three steps into the world.

The first step is into the world,
The second step is into self,
The third step is into the Mystery.

The step into the Mystery is essential as the first and second steps bring one into contact with suffering, both personal and societal. The last step takes one beyond suffering and into “mystery.”

Once taken, that final step into “the Mystery” opens up self to realities beyond the material as explained by Rumi:

Don’t grieve
Anything you lose comes round
in another form.
The child weaned from mother’s milk
now drinks wine and honey mixed.

God’s joy moves from unmarked box
to unmarked box, from cell to cell.
As rainwater, down into flowerbed.
As roses, up from ground.
now it looks like a plate of rice and fish,
now a cliff covered with vines,
now a horse being saddled.
It hides within these, till one day
it cracks them open.

 There’s the light gold of wheat in the sun
and the gold of bread
made from that wheat.
I have neither. I’m only talking
about them.

as a town in the desert
looks up at stars on a clear night.
                                       
                                            — Rumi

__________  Enneagram Monthly.  Issue 79, January 2002

